# Wilderness Travel to Find the Monk

Choose a good time to introduce an additional level of difficulty. 
## A Change in the Weather
A blizzard engulfs the mountain. Visibility is reduced to 30' or less. If a character succeeds on a DC 25 Intelligence (Nature) check, they will guess that the blizzard is likely to last for about 24-48 hours (18 + 3D12 hours). Exposure to these conditions overnight could lead to hypothermia and frostbite. Difficulty level of all skill and ability checks increases dramatically and/or the players have disadvantage on their rolls.

### What they will encounter
The following encounters are required for this adventure.

## Encounter: Wilderness Outpost
A small outpost has been built on the trail. The steep sides of the canyon, and the 15' wooden walls prevent anything that cannot fly or climb from proceeding further along the path. The characters are greeted by a watchman on a tower who demands to know their business. The watchman explains the purpose of the outpost is to prevent any local enemies, such as goblinoids, or bandits from waylaying citizens on the trail. The watchman calls out to his fellows to announce the arrival of the characters. He encourages them to help them get the gate open so that they can pass through. The watchman and his fellows are actually bandits that have killed the real guards, his goal is lure the characters into the pit trap that is set up in front of the gates (DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) to detect). If the characters step into the 5' area in front of the 10' gates, they must succeed on a DC 12 dexterity save, or suffer 2 bludgeoning damage + 4 piercing damage from the fall into the spiked pit trap. Fallen characters find themselves 10' below the level of the trail and would need to succeed a DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check to climb out. There is 1 Bandit Captain and 6 total Bandits in the outpost, 1d4 bandits are asleep in one of the bunk rooms at the time of the encounter. They would be roused by the noises of an alarm, or a loud skirmish. The Bandits have only managed to secure a tiny cache of mundane treasure. A DC 12 Intelligence (Investigation) check will reveal the location of recent graves of the actual guardsmen nearby further along the trail past the outpost. If interrogated about Hlam, the Bandits are only aware of rumor that there is hermit living in the mountains, but they have not encountered him.

## Encounter: Manticore Ambush
The trail leads the players to a canyon with a tall waterfall that pours down the steep cliff of the mountain to the north, it forms a small rocky pool, and the water drains out in a rushing stream across the trail and continues down the slightly less steep cliff to the south. There is a sturdy bridge that crosses the stream. Characters with a 15 or greater Passive Wisdom (Perception) will notice a large opening in the face of the cliff to the northeast. Once they reach the wooden bridge, animal noises draw the characters' attention to the cliff face, where a Manticore flies out of the cave and immediately attacks them. A second manticore emerges at the beginning of the next round of combat. The Manticore will attempt to stay out of melee range and attack with tail spikes. If it runs out of tail spikes it will engage in melee combat. If both Manticores are bloodied they will attempt to retreat to their cave to recuperate. There is no path leading to the cave entrance. It is likely that only creatures with a fly or climb speed would be able to get to the cave. Any other attempt would require climbing gear and DC 17 Strength (Athletics). If the Manticores detect that someone or something is attempting to climb to their cave, they would likely fly out to harass any creatures exposed on cliff face, or fly up and away to find other shelter to recover from wounds. The cave contains only the remains of the Manticore's most recent meal.

## Hazard: Rockslide/Avalanche
DC 12 Wisdom (Survival), on success the characters realize the path is narrow and loose rocks (or recent snowfall) on the steep slope has a high risk of coming down. The characters hear a booming sound, like thunder, which triggers the rockslide/avalanche. The event requires 3 DC 12 checks which represent the distance to safety. 
Fail Consequence
0 Safe
1 1d10 bludgeoning damage
2 2d10 bludgeoning damage plus the character is restrained
3 3d10 bludgeoning damage plus the character is buried
It requires 3 DC 12 Strength (Athletics) to uncover any buried character.

## Encounter: Twin Springs Mining Company
The characters can easily detect (DC 7 Wisdom (Survival)) the sights, sounds, and smells of a humanoid encampment near the trail. If they approach, they will see a small hand painted wooden sign that says in Common, Dwarvish, and Gnomish, "Twin Springs Mining Company." All together there are about 25 people in the large camp which is spread out in a clearing surrounding on three sides by gentle slope towards the higher mountain elevations. More than half of the people in the camp are suffering from some sort of ailment. No one in the camp is unfriendly, but most are disappointed that the characters are not the expected currier with news from their headquarters. The leaders of the camp are a female Gnome, Urquis Funnelstop, and her partner Oxebar. Urquis explains, or the characters can observe that most of the people, a mix of Humans, Dwarves and Gnomes are listless and unmotivated. A DC 12 Wisdom (Medicine) check would show that they do not seem to have any physical ailment, but they are mentally depressed. Most of them sleep 16-18 hours per day, eat very little food, and generally have a very grim demeanor. The company is running low on food and supplies and hoped to hear word if supplies would be forthcoming, or if they need to consider breaking camp and heading back to headquarters. If asked about their mining operations they will explain that they made a claim not too far from here further along the trail, but as soon as they attempted to start mining operations, they were attacked by viscous creatures lurking in the darkness. They did not come equipped to deal with such a large threat and will need to return to the mine with a large, well-armed force, or be forced to abandon their claim. This mine was the last hope of profitability for the flagging company. There are mumblings and grumblings in the camp about their situation. And some have any talked about approaching a known Hag in the area to strike a bargain to help heal whatever is ailing the folks or if that is not possible, maybe get something that will help them clear out the mine and make is safer for working in. Urquis offers to share their meager rations with the characters, but does not ask any favor of them, or seek their assistance with their current situation. If the characters have any suggestions for how to deal with the situation, it would likely be met with skepticism and/or pessimism from the brooding bunch. None of the members of the company are aware of or have any knowledge of the monk.

## Encounter: The Meditating Monk
After a full day of searching up and down numerous canyons in the area where the characters expect to locate the secluded monk, they find the right spot. A cave with a 10' opening leads about 100 yards into the mountain. Unlike most of the caves the characters have looked into, this one is both clean, meaning it doesn't have any remains or prey or any leavings of animals, and it doesn't smell like something has died in it. In the back of the cave the characters see an ancient monk sitting cross legged on a large boulder. Aside from a smoldering fire and a small bedding area, the only other item of interest in the cave is a polished black fist sized stone. When they are within line of sight, the monk holds up his index finger in anticipation of the character's greetings. After a long silent pause, the old man opens his eyes and says, "Alas, it is lost. A hundred-year-old truth lost." The monk continues, "Go ahead, tell me what was so important to bring you all the way up these mountains, to disturb my meditation." Assuming the characters discuss the concerns of the town of Ylraphon, Hlam will become slightly less agitated and will offer them tea and will sit and chat with them. He can impart a number of pieces of wisdom to the characters:
He enigmatically tells them, "A red hand brings chaos."
Regarding Deribis' concerns he says, "A cancerous twin stalks Waterdeep these days, and a benign twin stalks Ylraphon."
If pressed for any additional thoughts he tells them, "The town of Ylraphon has a well of truth. You can lead a man to water but you cannot make him lie in it."
Hlam explains that his method of meditation is to listen to the rocks. They are very old and possess great knowledge if one has the ability to hear it and the patience to wait for their slow thoughts to bubble up to the surface. "For example," he says, "the rocks told me they hold an ages old secret. One thousand Orc Slayers are buried in these lands. But do not wake them up, they have earned their long rest."
If any character has picked up the black stone, Hlam will tell them he tried to listed to that black stone, but all it did was scream in his ears. If asked he will tell the characters that he found it on the trail, and has no idea of its origin.
If the characters insist that Hlam return to Ylraphon he will tell them to pass a message to Deribis, "If he desires wisdom, let him listen to the rocks for himself. In the meantime, if there is any real emergency they know where to find me."

### Optional Encounters
Roll a D12 or pick an appropriate discovery or encounter. (Suggestion, if the tension pool dice have multiple 1's, choose and encounter. If only a single 1 appears choose a discovery. Optionally, the discoveries can be added in at any time to add flavor to the environment.

## 1 Discovery: Abandoned Mine
The entrance to this small mine is blocked. Small wooden signs near the blockage say "DANGER" in Common, Dwarvish, and Gnomish. A DC 12 Intelligence (Investigation) check reveals the blockage is manmade. The blockage is not absolutely complete, there are small gaps. If any character peers through the gaps, any light source will show obvious veins of mineral ores leading down the walls of the tunnel into the darkness. Any character with Passive Wisdom (Perception) 10 or greater can hear the sounds of low growling/grumbling emanating from the tunnel. (Is that a pair of glowing eyes peering out from the dark depths?)

## 2 Encounter: Hobgoblin Camp
A recently made trail leads off of the main trail, DC 12 Wisdom (Perception) to detect. Any character who succeeds on a DC 10 Wisdom (Survival) check can follow the trail; it leads about 1/4 mile away. Upon approach, it becomes obvious that some humanoids are camping nearby, DC 10 Wisdom (Perception). 4 Hobgoblins and their Hobgoblin Captain are found in a small encampment. If the characters spend any amount of time listening or observing the camp, and if they can understand Goblin, they will overhear the Hobgoblins complaining about the cold and wondering why they can't unleash "Fluffy" on some unsuspecting villagers. The Captain explains, again for the umpteenth time, that their orders were to "wait until the new star appears in the sky." This seems to quiet the arguments temporarily until they begin to discuss who's turn it is to feed "Fluffy". If the characters investigate or follow any Hobgoblins who leave the campfire with some scraps of food, they will quickly discover that "Fluffy" is a chained Ogre Zombie. The Hobgoblins and Fluffy go about their normal camp activities unless the characters do something that attracts their attention. At night, the Hobgoblins rotate a night watchman Passive Wisdom (Perception) 10. The Hobgoblins have no knowledge of the whereabouts of the monk.

## 3 Discovery: Ghosts in the Camp
At night, in the character's camp, ghosts of Orc Warriors begin to materialize. The ghosts are not aware of the presence of the characters. They and their commander are making preparations for an ambush on their Dwarf adversaries. If any of the characters understands Orcish, they will hear the ghost of an Orc Shaman trying to convince the troops that he can protect them from the magic blades which have been the bane of the Orcs who previously were seemingly undefeatable. The ghost's do not respond to any attempts to contact or interact with them. A Hallow spell will clear the area of the ghosts while it is in effect. Otherwise, the scene plays out until the ghosts indicate that their camp is under attack. The Orc Warriors pantomime a short fight with unseen assailants. One by one the Orcs are cut down by some unseen force. Once the ghosts have "died" their ghostly form turns to vapors and they are whisked away on the night's cool breeze.

## 4 Encounter Trapped Nightmare:
The characters hear the sounds of an animal not far off the trail, DC 12 Passive Wisdom (Perception). On a successful DC 12 Wisdom (Survival) check, the characters discover a Nightmare trapped by some hunter's snares (DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) to know that a Nightmare could not be trapped in such a way without the aid of magic). The Nightmare is wary of any creature that approaches, and will defend itself if it is attacked. To release the Nightmare from the snares requires 2 successful checks, a DC 12 Intelligence (Investigation) check to determine how to complete the task without making it worse, and a DC 15 or 20 Strength check to untie the snares (depending on success or failure of the Int check.) All checks are made at disadvantage unless the characters do "something" to prevent the Nightmare from interfering. (e.g. DC 12 Wisdom (Animal Handling)) If the characters spend too much time "looking" closely at the snares, and/or fail their checks, the Nightmare will instinctively thrash about with its hooves, +6 to hit, on a hit: 13 (2d8 + 4) bludgeoning damage plus 7 (2d6) fire damage. The Nightmare is actually a cursed Unicorn named Sparkles. The local Hag, Auntie Applescab cursed her to roam the mountains as a Nightmare for the offense of killing her sister, Granny Yellow Rot. Sparkles does not know what is required to remove the curse (FYI the death of Auntie Apple Scab does not release the curse). If the characters can find a way to communicate with the Nightmare, she can provide help in locating Hlam's cave, if asked. However, she is not able to lead or follow them as her curse demands that she roam the mountains endlessly to find sleeping folks to turn their dreams into vivid nightmares.

## 5 Discovery: Wizard Hat
Half buried in the trail; the characters find a wizard's hat. Inside is a set up papers with inscrutable arcane writing. An item like this would only be valuable to the original creator or someone who can decipher it.

## 6 Encounter: Blood on the Trail
A successful DC 20 Intelligence (Nature) check shows this is animal blood, along with other signs such as traces of fur that indicate it is probably from a large elk or other deer. The trail leads away from the trail, up the steep sides of the mountain. Following the trail would require 2 successful Wisdom (Survival) checks beginning at DC 12 and increasing to DC 15 as the trail leads up the slope. If successful, a DC 15 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check is required to keep from sliding down the side of the mountain. The trail ends and a DC 20 Intelligence (Investigation) check will allow the characters to spot a relatively small burrow in the side of the mountain. Upon any closer examination by the characters, they will see a cave just large enough for a mama Craig Cat, her two cubs, and a dead elk, her most recent kill. The cat will yowl at the characters as a warning. Any attempt to enter the burrow, or disturb the kill, or the cubs will lead to an attack by the enraged Craig Cat.

## 7 Discovery: Monument
On the side of the trail is a stone cairn with a metal plaque firmly affixed. Etched in common on the plaque it says, "On this very spot, a party of brave adventurers fought an insurmountable foe and paid the ultimate price. Their foolhardiness and bravado cost dozens of innocent lives. May the gods have mercy on their souls."

## 8 Encounter: Mountain Bargains
The characters meet a Dwarf Fur Trader on the trail. She is friendly and introduces herself as Brunhilda Applescab, but she says many people call her Auntie. The characters will easily notice that for a fur trapper/trader she carries an odd assortment of gear. She seems to be loaded with many different trinkets, feathers, amulets, and other oddities that would require closer inspection to identify. If the characters are in distress at all, she offers to help, she says in return, "they can owe her a small favor." She tells the characters that her cabin is about a mile off the trail and will lead them to it, if asked. 
The cabin is nestled in a sheltered area of the mountains. The weather is less problematic in this area. Under normal conditions, the characters would spot many types of mountain flora and fauna growing and thriving in the surrounding area. Auntie even seems very friendly with the local creatures. Calling to them as if by name, explaining that she does her hunting and trapping much further away from her happy little home so as not to disturb these "little dearies." If the players volunteer, or if Auntie discovers that they are in possession of her sister's heartstone, she will attempt to strike a bargain with them for its return. Without providing any unnecessary explanation, she will say it belonged to her sister and it has great sentimental value. If the players are in need of assistance, they can offer the stone to her in exchange and she will gladly make a deal to help with the predicament asking for no other payment. If she had previously told them they would "owe her a small favor" she will tell them that if they give her the stone, she'll consider it all the recompense needed for any previous aid given. If the characters are not in need of her assistance, or if they refuse to hand it over. She will start offering them items from her private collection of oddities. Possible items she might offer could have any of the following properties: remove curse, remove disease, polymorph, revivify, disguise, etc. If the characters ask for something specific, there is a high chance that she will have the thing, or something very close to be able to exchange. She wants the stone. If the characters will not make an exchange she gets angry, reverts to her normal Annis Hag form, and the illusion around the cabin and surrounding area is dropped to reveal her hideous form, and that the cabin is a massive rotting tree stump with the Hag's shelter carved into it, and the surrounding area is covered in oozing moss, stagnant pools, and the creatures around are revealed to be corrupted versions of themselves. For example, the cute snow rabbit would now be seen as having about one quarter of its face missing and at least one unusable limb. She will still attempt to strike a bargain, hoping that now that she has shown her true colors, they characters may know how serious she is about her offers for the stone. If they still refuse, she will not do any direct harm to them unless they act first, but she will turn them out into the elements. If it seems like they intend to linger in her area, she will warn them with a scowl that the mountains will not be safe for them. She produces a goat horn and blows a trumpeting sound. She says her friend will be along in a few minutes, maybe they've already met him. She describes him as 15' tall, has white fur and a terrible temper. (The Abominable Yeti will arrive in 1d4 minutes). Auntie Applescab is aware of the presence of the monk in his hermitage in the mountains. She doesn't know the exact location, but could provide some general landmarks to ensure they are headed in the right direction, if she is trying to curry their favor. If she is unhappy with the characters, she will likely give them wrong directions.

## 9 Encounter: Goats
The trail becomes very narrow and 2 Giant Goats are currently grazing on the sparse foliage on the edges of the trail. DC 12 Wisdom (Animal Handling) to approach and/or attempt to walk past the goats without triggering any aggression. If the characters take too long to decide what to do, one of the goats decides to assert ownership of the trail.

## 10 Encounter: Courier 8
DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) to notice 6 hawks circling overhead. DC 12 Wisdom (Survival) to navigate to the location they are flying over. Several hundred yards off the trail the characters can find a Giant Wolf Spider attempting to wrap up a humanoid corpse. The Hawks are making a tentative swoop at the Spider, it is unlikely the hungry spider will give up its meal. The Spider will attempt to defend its prey, but if it is outmatched it will look for a way to retreat to fight another day. The Hawks will take advantage of any opportunity to snatch at the corpse, the Spider, or any other targets of opportunity. But if any adversary focuses their attention on the Hawks they will likely just circle up as high as necessary and observe from there.
The corpse is a human courier. Any investigation will locate the message in the courier’s pouch addressed to The Twin Springs Mining Company. "Abort! Do not attempt to excavate the chosen site. We have just now learned of the dangerous creatures inhabiting the cave system. I repeat myself, do not, under any circumstances, attempt to explore, or set up any mining operations at The Yearning Hollow cave/mine site. Due to this unfortunate setback, we are unable to secure credit for the upcoming resupply caravan. Unless you have secured another potential site, it would be in your best interests to break camp and return to headquarters. If I do not receive word back from you, I will assume that you have either found a suitable alternate location or have decided to wait until Spring to make the long trip home." Signed "Respectfully Kizzak Sapphireshield"

## 11 Encounter: Fire Beetles
The characters encounter 3d6 Fire Beetles swarming near the trail. The Beetles shed bright light 10' and dim light for an additional 10'. Their glands continue to shine light after death for 1d6 days. A character who succeeds on a DC 12 Intelligence (Nature) check would likely know that this is not normal activity for Fire Beetles (or any beetles). Something must have disturbed their underground habitat. The Beetles are not aggressive unless they are disturbed.

## 12 Discovery: Hot Springs
A short distance away from the trail, the characters discover a surprising sight. There is a hot springs pool occupied by a breathtakingly beautiful creature of the same species as the character observing. It is only adorned with an ornate ruby necklace that flashes with fiery light. Their golden eyes sparkle with intelligence and yet seems oblivious to their surroundings, lost in the moment of complete enjoyment of the spring.
As the characters approach, the creature closes their eyes and stretch out in sheer pleasure, seemingly near their climax. But at this moment, they notice the party and immediately shriek in terror. They and the hot springs instantly change into a rotten log floating in a stagnant festering pool of murky water. The ruby necklace hanging on the log is all that remains of the previous scene.
